---
title: Setting up a Static IP on Linux
date: 2023-08-20 12:42:22
categories: [Networking,Linux]
tags: [linux,networking,static ip,network configuration,terminal]
---

For this tutorial, all you need is Super User access to your Linux machine and a text editor.


## Step 1 - Find your network interface

Access your server and start by finding out the name of your *NIC* (Network Interface Card). 

```bash
ip a
```
{: .nolineno }

Output:

```terminal
1: lo: <LOOPBACK,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 65536 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN group default qlen 1000
    link/loopback 00:00:00:00:00:00 brd 00:00:00:00:00:00
    inet 127.0.0.1/8 scope host lo
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
    inet6 ::1/128 scope host noprefixroute
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
2: ens18: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 1500 qdisc fq_codel state UP group default qlen 1000
    link/ether 22:fd:0f:5d:5e:f4 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
    altname enp0s18
    inet 172.16.255.253/24 brd inet 172.16.255.255 scope global dynamic ens18
       valid_lft 229738sec preferred_lft 229738sec
    inet6 fe80::20fd:fff:fe5d:5ef4/64 scope link
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
```

In this case, the output shows us two interfaces:

*`lo`*: Stands for loopback is the interface used for communication within the device itself. Typically, this interface will have assigned the IP `127.0.0.1` and usually gets represented by the hostname `localhost`.

*`ens18`*: This is the interface we are looking for. `en` indicates that it is an Ethernet connection.

**Note:** The name of the interface connection can be different from machine to machine. Other common examples are: `eth0, enp0s3m, ens33, eno1` and for wireless you can find something like `wlx74da38f468d2` or `wlan0`.

## Step 2 - Find which service you are using.

Debian-based systems mainly have two configurations. `Ifupdown` and `Netplan.io`.

### Check for ifupdown: 
If your system is using ifupdown, which is more common on older systems, the following command should return `enabled`.
```bash
sudo systemctl is-enabled networking.service
```
{: .nolineno }

### Check for Netplan:
Netplan is the new standard for the recent versions of Ubuntu and some other Debian-based distributions. The following command should return `enabled`.

```bash
sudo systemctl is-enabled systemd-networkd.service
```
{: .nolineno }

## Step 3 - Edit the Network Configuration

The configuration is different for each service.

### Ifupdown:

Here, you will need the name we saw earlier `ens18`. In this example, you must edit the file `/etc/network/interfaces` as `root`.

Initially, the content of the file should look something like this:

```bash
# This file describes the network interfaces available on your system
# and how to activate them. For more information, see interfaces(5).

source /etc/network/interfaces.d/*

# The loopback network interface
auto lo
iface lo inet loopback

# The primary network interface
allow-hotplug ens18
iface ens18 inet dhcp
```

We have to edit the file to look something like this:

```bash
# This file describes the network interfaces available on your system
# and how to activate them. For more information, see interfaces(5).

source /etc/network/interfaces.d/*

# The loopback network interface
auto lo
iface lo inet loopback

# The primary network interface
auto ens18
iface ens18 inet static
address 172.16.255.4
netmask 255.255.255.0
gateway 172.16.255.1
dns-nameservers 1.1.1.1,9.9.9.9
```

The last thing is to restart the service:
```bash
sudo service networking restart
```
{: .nolineno }

Well done! If you run the command `ip a`, again you should see your new IP, in this case, `inet 172.16.255.4/24`.

### Netplan

For Netplan, the configuration is written in YAML. Edit the file present in `/etc/netplan/`. This file has an arbitrary name, typically something like `XX-cloud-init.yaml`.

The content of the file should look something like this:
```yaml
# This is the network config written by 'console-conf'
network:
  ethernets:
    ens18:
      dhcp4: true
  version: 2
```

To setup the static IP modify the file to look like this:

```yaml
network:
  version: 2
  ethernets:
    ens18:
      addresses:
        - 172.16.255.4/24
      routes:
        - to: default
          via: 172.16.255.1
      nameservers:
        addresses:
          - 1.1.1.1
          - 9.9.9.9
```

When you finish editing the file, you can use the command `netplan generate` to compile the file. `netplan apply` to aply the new configuration. 

Well done! If you run the command `ip a`, again you should see your new IP, in this case, `inet 172.16.255.4/24`.

## Conclusion

Congratulations! You've learned how to configure a **static IP** address on your **Debian-based Linux** system using two popular methods: `Netplan` and `ifupdown`. Whether you prefer the simplicity of `Netplan's YAML` configuration or the traditional approach of `ifupdown`, you now have the knowledge and confidence to tailor your network settings according to your needs.

By mastering these techniques, you've empowered yourself to take control of your system's network configuration. Whether setting up a home server, deploying network services, or ensuring a consistent connection, having a static IP address provides stability and predictability to your network environment.

Remember, technology is all about flexibility. Now, you have the tools to adapt your Linux system's networking to your specific requirements. Keep exploring, learning, and experimenting - you're on your way to becoming a Linux networking expert!

Happy networking! 🚀🌐